Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu
will address a joint meeting of Congress
ahead of his speech,
hundreds of protesters
staged a sit in inside
the Capitol
calling for a ceasefire in Gaza.
Dozens of Democratic lawmakers
are planning to skip the speech
as the party remains
divided over his handling of the war.
CNN's Lauren Fox is with me now.
What are we expecting today? Loren?
Yeah, this address is coming
at such a tumultuous time.
And not just U.S.
politics, but also Israeli politics.
And as Benjamin Netanyahu
faces challenges back home.
This is a high stakes
speech for him,
given the fact that there are lawmakers
who are going to be in this audience,
who have serious questions,
serious doubts
about Netanyahu's leadership right now.
And that includes some Republicans.
I was talking last night
to Senator Joni Ernst.
She serves on the
Armed Services Committee,
and she said she has to hear a very clear
and concise message from Netanyahu today
about the path forward in this war
and how he is going to get hostages home.
She said.
It is far beyond time for that to happen.
But you are also going
to see many Democrats
not attending this speech today.
There are more than 80 House
Democrats
who we know
are going to be boycotting six U.S.
senators who are going to be boycotting,
including Patty Murray,
who is a top Democrat in leadership,
who is not going to be
attending this speech today.
Overseeing it is going to be Senator
Ben Cardin. He's going to be presiding.
And I think that that just says a lot
about this moment right now
as Netanyahu comes in
to give this address.
You know,
there are some Democrats
who are going to be
having alternative programing.
This is Congresswoman
Pramila Jayapal, who said in a statement,
instead of attending
Benjamin Netanyahu's address,
I will attend a panel discussion
led by the Center of American Progress
and other organizations
on the path to Peace.
This event
will feature a Palestinian leader,
a Jewish
Israeli leader and a former IDF soldier,
all of whom are dedicated
to finding a path
toward peace and security.
And I just want to remind people
that this address is happening
after the initial invitation
went out from speaker Mike Johnson.
Obviously, it's
going to be really interesting
to see what House Republicans
think of this speech.
Meanwhile, last night
on the Senate floor,
a series of Democrats
addressed the issues
that they see
happening
and concerns
that they have about Benjamin
Netanyahu coming.
This is independent
Senator Bernie Sanders.
It will be the
first time in American history
that a war criminal
has been given that order.
Frankly, this invitation
to Netanyahu is a disgrace
and something that we will look back on
with regret.
And earlier this year,
remember, Majority Leader Chuck Schumer
actually called on the Israeli people
to hold a new election
and replace Benjamin Netanyahu.
Laura Fox in Washington
will be watching this very closely.
Lauren, thank you very much.
Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu
will address the US Congress
for a record fourth time.
Now he hopes to shore up
American support for the war in Gaza.
But many of the families
of Israeli hostages
still held in Gaza
are criticizing his trip,
with some saying
he should have remained at home
to secure a deal to release the hostages.
Now his trip comes amid
an upheaval in U.S.
politics.
Though his visit was orchestrated
by Republican leaders,
many prominent Democrats
like Vice President Harris
and Senator Elizabeth Warren
won't be in attendance for his speech.
I'm not going
because, Benjamin Netanyahu
has led that region
into a complete humanitarian disaster.
He has put his own personal interests
ahead of the interests
of the people of his country.
And what he has done in Gaza
is unspeakable right now.
Prime Minister Netanyahu is scheduled
to meet
President Biden on Thursday
and former President Trump on Friday.
CNN's Not a Beshear
joins us now live from London.
so not a what
can you tell us about the upcoming speech
and what
Netanyahu here expects to achieve?
Look, mean?
There is growing pressure
from representatives and family members
of those hostages
still held captive by Hamas in Gaza.
For Prime Minister Netanyahu
to strike a deal.
They want that to be
the focus of his address to Congress.
In fact, we've heard from the
host of Challenge Forum,
which has said they want to see
Netanyahu opening his address
by saying that is a deal.
And we have heard some optimistic notes
from the Israeli prime minister,
and we've even heard some
signs of optimism from U.S.
officials as well.
It's understood
that there is
a clear
framework on the deal
that they're just hammering out
those finer details and technicalities.
But as you mentioned,
there is growing criticism
of the Israeli prime
minister back home in Israel
and from the family members
and representatives
of those hostages
still have cut to saying that
he should be at home focusing
on the return of those hostages,
bringing an end
to the war in Gaza, securing
that ceasefire agreement.
Now, of course,
all eyes will be on his address.
Now, as you mentioned,
we are already seeing backlash
in Washington DC,
not only as members of the Democrat Party
now choosing to boycott, to
not attend
the congressional address
by the Israeli prime minister.
But we're also seeing protests as well.
Of course, we saw protests yesterday.
Members of the Jewish Voice for peace
movement occupying is staging a sit in
in congressional building.
We've also seen,
of course, other protest
taking place across the country
and are expecting to see more today.
But of course, that
growing black
backlash is not only centered in Israel
and in Washington.
It is a global backlash.
And, of course, the U.S.
has been vocal in pushing
the Israeli government for a cease fire
deal to be struck.
Now, at this stage,
we've heard from President Biden
speaking on Monday,
he believes that the parties
involved in this negotiation
are, in his words,
on the verge of coming
to some sort of agreement.
The State Department has said
that the gap separating
those two is narrowing,
that there are still some issues
which remain.
But of course, pressure is mounting.
And of course, the situation in Gaza
is only worsening as well.
If a deal isn't struck soon,
we will be entering ten months
of this war.
That is, ten months
with hostages
still held captive in Hamas.
That is,
ten months with civilians
in Gaza being killed on a daily basis.
That death toll now topping 39,000.
The UN
warning that famine is spreading
throughout the Gaza Strip,
and we are seeing
the humanitarian situation
worsened with that disease,
is spreading rapidly
across the Gaza Strip.
We're seeing continued airstrikes
in southern Gaza as well.
Of course, deadly strikes in Khan
Younis, where
hundreds, thousands,
even civilians
have been ordered to evacuate once again.
So it is a deteriorating situation.
We're seeing mounting pressure from U.S.
officials.
Many have been careful
to clarify that the U.S.
maintains
its strong relationship with Israel,
that Israel continues
to be
one of the United States closest
and perhaps
most important allies in the Middle East.
But again,
we have seen those
tensions mounting,
particularly between President Biden
and the Israeli Prime
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
They are expected to meet, of course,
on Thursday.
Netanyahu now also expected to meet with
with Donald Trump formally as president,
and of course, also with Kamala Harris.
So important meetings taking place.
But all eyes will be on that
congressional address later today,
expectations around what he might say.
And of course, the reaction,
crucially from the Democrats as well,
and all of the very real dynamics
that you laid out,
particularly on the humanitarian front,
playing out in the politics of
who will attend Netanyahu's address.
surely not a Beshear.
Thank you so much for the reporting.
Now, the head of the opposition
Labor Party in Israel is blasting
the trip.
Yeah, your goal and posting on it,
saying, quote,
Netanyahu went to the US
for an extravagant show
in the middle of the war
without a deal to return hostages.
I want to bring in CNN
global affairs analyst Mark Esper.
He was U.S.
defense secretary under President Trump.
good to see you.
Thanks for being here.
Now, Secretary of State
Antony Blinken says
they're inside the ten yard line,
driving toward the goal line
and getting a cease fire.
That's his metaphor, not mine.
But in getting a cease fire
and hostage agreement
that would produce, a cease fire.
How optimistic
are you of a deal
getting done at this stage?
And what do you make of Netanyahu
appearing before Congress
without a finalized deal?
Right.
Well, I was
actually with,
Jake Sullivan and Tony Blinken
this past weekend in Aspen,
and we talked about this
and both believe are confident
that we're within the ten yard line,
as you said.
But they also note that the often
those last
ten yards are the most difficult.
look, I would say in some ways
we've been here before.
There have been numerous proposals
on the table for Hamas.
at the last minute
they've raised the ante with,
asking for adjustments
and amendments and so forth.
So we'll see.
I mean, there is hope
that there will be
some type of agreement,
but my view has been that
Hamas is not going to be interested
in any deal
that does not call
for a complete cease fire
and the removal of all Israeli
troops from Gaza.
And,
I see the Israeli government,
Netanyahu unwilling to go there yet.
if you look,
the polling shows that a majority of,
Israelis want to see,
no more Hamas in Gaza.
And they are very concerned
about what might happen
if, if Hamas is not dismantled.
So I think they're probably further apart
than we would like,
but we'll see what happens
in the coming days.